Haiti's President Jovenel Moïse has been killed and his wife injured in an attack on their home in the nation's capital, Port-au-Prince.
Unidentified gunmen stormed the property at 01:00 local time (05:00 GMT), interim PM Claude Joseph said.
He has called for calm and declared a state of emergency nationwide.
Mr Moïse had led Haiti, one of the poorest nations in the world, since 2017 but had faced widespread protests demanding his resignation.
The nation's recent history has been plagued by coups, political instability and widespread gang violence.
UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson tweeted that he was "saddened at the death of Mr Moïse", calling it "an abhorrent act" and appealing for calm. US President Joe Biden offered condolences to the people of Haiti for the "horrific assassination".
Mr Joseph called the shooting of the president a "heinous, inhuman and barbaric act", saying the attackers were "foreigners who spoke English and Spanish". Haiti's official languages are Creole and French.
Some reports spoke of men dressed in black carrying high-powered weapons who may have pretended to be part of a US drug enforcement operation, but no official details have been given.
Addressing the nation, Mr Joseph vowed the killers would be brought to justice and said the security situation was "under control".
The state of emergency, or "state of siege", allows for the banning of gatherings and use of the military for police roles, along with other extensions of executive powers.
Mr Joseph said that "all measures have been taken to ensure continuity" and that "democracy and the republic will win".
But questions remain about how much control Mr Joseph can assert.
Haiti's constitution says ministers, under the leadership of the prime minister, take control in the event of presidential vacancy, until elections can be called.
But that also remains unclear, as a new prime minister, Ariel Henry, had been named by Mr Moïse just this week but has yet to be sworn in.
The streets of the capital appeared to be largely empty on Wednesday morning.
The neighbouring Dominican Republic ordered the "immediate closure" of its border with Haiti.
First Lady Martine Moïse is being treated in hospital but her condition remains unclear.
Jovenel Moïse, 53, had been in power since February 2017.
His time in office was rocky as he faced accusations of corruption and there were widespread demonstrations in the capital and other cities earlier this year.
Haiti's opposition said that Mr Moïse's five-year term should have ended on 7 February 2021, five years to the day since his predecessor, Michel Martelly, stepped down.
But there had been a year's delay to elections after Mr Martelly's departure, and Mr Moïse insisted he had one more year to serve as he did not take office until 7 February 2017.
Parliamentary elections should have been held in October 2019 but disputes have delayed them, meaning Mr Moïse had been ruling by decree.
In February this year, on the day the opposition wanted him to leave office, Mr Moïse said an attempt to kill him and overthrow the government had been foiled.
Haiti has also faced a wave of recent gang violence and kidnappings, particularly in the capital, with a number of its districts becoming no-go areas.
The worsening living standards in the nation of 11 million people have pushed nearly 60% below the poverty line.
An earthquake in 2010 killed more than 200,000 people and caused extensive damage to the infrastructure and the economy.
A UN peacekeeping force was put in place in 2004 to help stabilise the country, and only withdrew in 2017, but the turmoil has shown no sign of ending.
Dispute over Haiti presidency triggers unrest
Why are there so many protests in Haiti?
Haiti's president defies calls to quit
Euro 2020 semi-final: England v Denmark build-up
Follow build-up and radio & text commentary of England v Denmark in the second Euro 2020 semi-final.
Millions could end up self-isolating this summer
Starmer warns of summer chaos over self-isolation
Dying too young: Maps show little has changed
England's excitement ahead of Euro 2020 semi-final
What's it like to have Gareth Southgate as your manager?
Why North America's killer heat scares me
The police who turned against the Myanmar military. VideoThe police who turned against the Myanmar military
Inside the ‘hidden part of the criminal justice system’ VideoInside the ‘hidden part of the criminal justice system’
UK reports 32,54 cases on Wednesday
Ray BLK: 'Same artist, different person'
How Paula Rego remains a master storyteller
After years of rivalry, Ali takes on Frazier...
Hip hop star Nas looks back at an event that changed the world forever
How do investigators track down criminals?
Forensics: The Real CSI reveals the crucial role of cutting-edge science
Partial win for Vardy in 'Wagatha Christie' case1
Intruder removed from TV's Love Island villa2
Millions could end up self-isolating this summer3
Haiti's president killed in attack at home4
Minister resigns to focus on cancer recovery5
Shooting of investigative reporter stuns Dutch6
Widow cleared of sex charges calls for law change7
Backlash against longer hours for lorry drivers8
Dying too young: Maps show little has changed9
UK reports 32,54 cases on Wednesday10
Footy anthems to get the party started! AudioFooty anthems to get the party started!
A unique take on last night's match. iPlayerA unique take on last night's match
Creating England's Euros anthem! iPlayerCreating England's Euros anthem!
Shearer takes a trip down memory lane. iPlayerShearer takes a trip down memory lane
© 2021 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
